About the MMF Erosion model
===========================

.. note:: This section was copied from the manual

In this chapter we are going to apply the Morgan, Morgan and Finney (MMF) method
on the Hadocha sub-catchment of The Fincha’a study area. The work can be divided
in five different parts; the first part is a virtual tour through the catchment.
In the second part you will make the maps needed for the model from the raw
data. The third part will direct you through all the different steps in the MMF
model. The fourth step is combining all the different steps into one model.
During the fifth step; implementing Land Improvement measures into the MMF
method, you will show what you have learned about the MMF model and show your
GIS capacities obtained during this course. 

 
.. note::
    Before you start with the next chapter, you have to read the article: *Land
    management, erosion problems and soil and water conservation in Fincha’a
    watershed, western Ethiopia by Bezuayehu Tefera and Geert Sterk*. You need
    the information from this article for the next exercises. The article can be
    found in Annex 1 of this practical guide. 

Preparing the data for the Morgan, Morgan and Finney Method
-----------------------------------------------------------

.. tip::
   You are now starting the most important part of the practical. At this point, we
   strongly recommend you to read briefly the rest of the manual to check the
   expected outcomes (you can skip the steps for now). It is essential that you
   understand what and why you are doing from the beginning. In this chapter you
   are going to prepare the data for the Morgan, Morgan and Finney Method (MMF see
   also Annex 1) to assess the erosion rates of the Hadocha catchment and come up
   the land management scenarios to reduce erosion in the catchment. GIS will help
   you assessing the impact of your measures. 

Morgan et al. (1984) developed a model to predict annual soil loss from
field-sized areas on hill slopes, which, while endeavouring to retain the
simplicity of the USLE, encompassed some of the then recent advances in
understanding of soil erosion processes. The approach was revised by Morgan
(2001). The model separates the soil erosion processes into a water phase and a
sediment phase. It considers soil erosion to result from the detachment of soil
particles by raindrop impact and runoff and the transport of those particles by
overland flow. The process of transport by rain splash is ignored. Thus, the
sediment phase comprises three predictive equations, one for the rate of
particle detachment by rain splash, one for the rate of particle detachment by
runoff and one for transport capacity of overland flow. The inputs to these
equations of rainfall energy and runoff volume respectively are obtained from
the water phase. The model uses 12 operating functions for which 19 input
parameters are required. 

The effects of soil conservation practices can be included in the separate
phases of the model. For example, agronomic measures will bring about changes in
evapotranspiration, interception and crop management, which will affect
respectively the volume of runoff, the rate of detachment and the transport
capacity. 

The model compares the predictions of total detachment by rain splash and runoff
with the transport capacity of the runoff and assigns the lower of the two
values as the annual rate of soil loss, thereby denoting whether detachment or
transport is the limiting factor. The predictions obtained by the model are most
sensitive to changes in annual rainfall and soil parameters when erosion is
transport limited and to changes in rainfall interception and annual rainfall
when erosion is detachment limited. Thus, good information on rainfall, soils
and land use is required for successful prediction.  

Like the USLE, the model cannot be used to predict soil loss from individual
storms or from gully erosion. The model can be used to predict soil loss from
small catchments by dividing the catchment into land units of similar soils,
slopes and land cover and routing the annual runoff and sediment production over
the land surface from one unit to another. The runoff for each unit is then
calculated as the summation of the runoff generated on that unit and the runoff
flowing into it from upslope; the transport capacity is calculated for the
combined runoff. Similarly, the total sediment available for transport is the
summation of that detached on that unit and the material transported into the
unit from upslope, and this is compared to the transport capacity. When operated
in this way, the model is able to identify the major source areas of sediment
and the locations of deposition within a catchment and to provide the
information for the sediment delivery ratio. 
